---
layout: note
title:  "Lower Bounds for Comparison Based Sorting"
date:   2021-02-05 12:02:24
modified_date: 2021-02-08 12:00:00
categories: csce 411
semester: spring21
---
<figcaption>Some sections from lecture 7 (3 Feb. 2021), lecture 8 (8 Feb. 2021) and this lecture were merged into this post.</figcaption>

## Theorem
> Any comparison based sorting algorithm is bounded below by $$\Omega(n\log n)$$ on inputs of $$n$$ elements.

----------

## Proof
Let $$\mathcal{M}$$ be such an algorithm. For a given input $$a = (a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n)$$, there exists a binary decision tree which the algorithm follows based on each comparison's result. Eventually $$\mathcal{M}(a)$$ will end at a leaf node on the decision tree, which corresponds to the sorted output of the input $$a$$. (For this exercise, sps. the function $$\mathcal{M}(a)$$ returns a leaf of the execution tree, rather than the sorted input.)

Sps. we gave $$\mathcal{M}$$ permutations of $$a$$, rather than $$a$$ itself, let the set of permutations be $$\Pi = \\{\pi_1, \pi_2, \dots, \pi_{n!}\\}$$. Then, for any two unique permutations $$\pi_a, \pi_b \in \Pi$$, $$\mathcal{M}(\pi_a) = \mathcal{M}(\pi_b)$$  must mean that $$\mathcal{M}(\pi_a)$$ and $$\mathcal{M}(\pi_b)$$ followed the same execution path, which is impossible if $$\mathcal{M}$$ is a sorting algorithm. Therefore, by way of contradiction, we have that $$\mathcal{M}(\pi_a) \neq \mathcal{M}(\pi_b)$$.

The decision tree is a binary tree, as such it has a height $$h$$. The number of nodes in the last layer of the decision tree must be less than or equal to $$2^h$$. From above, we now have $$\forall \pi \in \Pi,\ \exists!\,\mathcal{M}(\pi)$$, if $$\mathcal{M}(\pi)$$ is a leaf, then $$2^h \geq n!$$ because $$\|\Pi\| = n!$$. It then follows, that $$\mathcal{M}$$ must have at minimum $$h$$ steps, or is bounded by $$\Omega(h)$$.

Solving for $$h$$.

$$
\begin{align}
2^h &\geq n!\\
h &\geq \log n!\\
&\geq \log\left[\left(\frac{n}{2}\right)^{\frac{n}{2}}\right] \tag*{\scriptsize{(See: Sterling's Approximation)}}\\
&\geq \frac{n}{2}\log\frac{n}{2}\\
&\geq \frac{n}{2}(\log n - 1)\\
&\geq \frac{n}{2}\log(n) - \frac{n}{2}\\
&\geq \frac{1}{4}n\log n\ \forall\,n \geq 4.
\end{align}
$$

Therefore, if $$\mathcal{M}$$ is bounded by $$\Omega(h)$$, from the above we have that $$\mathcal{M}$$ is boundad by $$\Omega(n\log n)$$.

QED.

----------

## Further Lower Bounds

This technique can be used to prove lower bounds for other problems, like searching.

### Searching(S, x)
Given a set $$S = \{a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n\}$$ of elements and a searched element x, where the set S can be pre-organized in any way, decide if $$x \in S$$.

- BinarySearch($$S$$, x)
  - If the set $$S$$ is organized as a sorted array, then we can determine if $$x \in S$$ in time $$\mathcal{O}(\log n)$$.
- Comparison-based Searching Algorithms
  - The algorithms behave differently based on the results of comparing the searched element x with elements in $$S$$.
  - BinarySearch is comparison-based.

## Theorem
> A comparison-based searching algorithm takes time $$\Omega(\log n)$$, no matter how $$S$$ is organized.

## Proof
For this exercise, we will group the case where two elements are equal into the left sub-tree, rather than its own branch.

Let $$\mathcal{M}$$ be such an algorithm. For some input $$S = \{2,4,\dots,2n\}$$, we choose $$2i, 2h \in S, i < h$$. Sps. $$\mathcal{M}(S, 2i) = \mathcal{M}(S, 2h)$$, then $$\mathcal{M}(S, 2i + 1)$$ will end up with a "yes", as $$2i < 2i + 1 < 2h$$, contradiction. Therefore, we know that $$\mathcal{M}(S, 2i) \neq \mathcal{M}(S, 2h)$$. Thus, the tree must have more than $$n$$ leaves. The height of the decision tree is $$h$$, then $$h \geq \log n$$. If the height of the tree is the number of comparisons, then it is bounded by $$\Omega(h)$$, from the above we get the lower bound $$\Omega(\log n)$$.

QED.

## Remarks
- BinarySearch is an **optimal** comparison-based searching algorithm
- HeapSort and MergeSort are optimal comparison-based sorting algorithms
- The lower bounds for sorting and searching discussed on this page are valid only for comparison-based algorithms.

{% example %}
1

A comparison based sorting algorithm would operate exactly the same on the following inputs:

```
A = [5.1, 3.2, 2.9, 4.1, 9.7, 6.4, 9.8, 1000.1, 100.1, 0.2]
B = [5,3,2,4,7,6,8,10,9,1]
```
{% endexample %}

- There exist non-comparison sorting algorithms
  - Sorting: Counting Sort, Radix Sort, Bucket Sort
  - Searching: Hashing
  - These algorithms make strong assumptions on the data, which is why they are not always used.
