---
layout: note
title:  "Linear-Time Sorting: Radix Sort"
date:   2021-02-10 12:00:05
categories: csce 411
semester: spring21
---
<figcaption>Some sections from lecture 11 (12 Feb. 2021) and this lecture was merged into this post.</figcaption>
## Radix Sort
If we have very large numbers, counting sort would not be practical due to \\(k\\) being very large. However, radix sort instead uses a stable sorting algorithm to sort very large numbers based on place values.

This is a stable sort, i.e. relative positions for elements of the same value are preserved.

### Pseudocode
```ruby
RadixSort(A[n])
# elements in array A[n] are integers
# of at most d digits.
for (i = d; i > 0; i--)
    stably sort the array A[n] using
    the i-th digit from right
```

### Time complexity
If the stable sort used in radix sort is counting sort, then we have \\(\mathcal{O}(n + k)\\), where \\(k\\) is the number of digits, e.g. 10 if we're sorting base-10 ints. Then, radix sort is \\(\mathcal{O}(d\cdot n)\\), where \\(d\\) is the number of digits in the largest number, i.e. \\(d = \log_k (\max n)\\), where \\(k\\) is the base.


## Theorem
> ***RadixSort*** outputs a sorted list.

## Proof
Let \\(X, Y \in A[n]\\) be integers, with digit representation as\\(X = \\{x_1, x_2, \dots, x_d\\}\\), and \\(Y = \\{y_1, y_2, \dots, y_d\\}\\), and chosen such that \\(X < Y\\), which means \\(X\\) is placed before \\(Y\\) in the output.

If \\(X < Y\\), it follows that \\(x_1 = y_1, \dots, x_h = y_h, x_{h+1} < y_{h+1}\\). When we sort in terms of the \\(h + 1\\)<sup>st</sup> digit, then \\(X\\) is placed before \\(Y\\) in the output.

Since our base sorting algorithm is stable, and since the digits \\(x_1 = y_1, \dots, x_h = y_h, x_{h+1}\\), \\(x\\) will always come before \\(y\\).

QED.

## Remarks
1. When \\(d\\) is a constant, the algorithm is linear time.
2. Stable sorting is essential
3. The elements do not have to be itegers, they can be strings of characters
4. It can be generalsed to sort integers in \\([0..n^4-1]\\)
    Each integer in r can be written as \\(r = c_3n^3 + c_2n^2 + c_1n + c_0\\), where \\(0 \leq c_h \leq n - 1\\)
