---
layout: note
title:  "Haskell: Functions and Currying"
date:   2021-01-29 9:20:00 -0600
categories: csce 314
semester: spring21
---
## Function Types
A **function** maps from type T1 to T2, with type T1 -> T2.
These functions take 1 parameter, functions with multiple arguments or results are possible using lists or tuples.

## Curried Functions
**Curried functions** accept multiple arguments by returning functions as results.

```haskell
add :: (Int, Int) -> Int
add (x, y) = x + y

add' :: Int -> (Int -> Int)
add' x y = x + y
```

- `add` and `add'` produce the same final result, but `add` takes its arguments at the same time, whereas `add'` takes one at a time.
- Functions that take their arguments one at a time are called **curried** functions.

Functions with more than two arguments can be curried by returning nested functions

```haskell
mult :: Int -> (Int -> (Int -> Int))
mult x y z = x * y * z
```
<figcaption markdown="1">
`mult` takes an integer `x` and returns a function `mult x`, which takes an integer `y` and returns a function `mult x y` which takes an integer `z`, and returns the result `x * y * z`
</figcaption>

Note:
- Functions returning functions are **higher-order** functions
- Unless tupling is explicitly required, all functions in Haskell are typically defined in curried form

### Why is Currying Useful?
Curried functions are more flexible than functions on tuples, because useful functions can often be made by **partially applying** a curried function.

```haskell
add' 1 :: Int -> Int
take 5 :: [a] -> [a]
drop 5 :: [a] -> [a]

map :: (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]
map f  []      = []
map f  (x:xs)  = f x : map f xs

> map (add' 1) [1, 2, 3]
[2, 3, 4]
```

### Currying Conventions
To avoid excess parenthesis,
1. The arrow `->` (type constructor) is right associative.  
`Int -> Int -> Int -> Int` means `Int -> (Int -> (Int -> Int))`
1. The function application is left associative.  
`mult x y z` means `((mult x) y) z`
