---
layout: note
title:  "Ch. 1 ยง2-3 Acc. and Amt. Funcs., and Eff. Rate of Interest"
date:   2021-01-19 11:30:00
categories: math 325
semester: spring21
---

## ยง 1.2: The Accumulation and Amount Functions
Terminology:
- **Interest** -- the compoensation that a borrower of capital pays to a lender of capital for its use.
- **Principal** -- the initial amount of money invested.
- **Accumulated Amount** -- the total amount of money received after a period of time.

The amount of **interest** earned is the difference between accumulated amount and the principal.
The **period** is the unit in which time is measured, most commonly one year unless stated otherwise.

{% definition %}
Accumulation Function

Denoted as $$a(t)$$, gives the accumulated value at $$t \ge 0$$ for an original investment of 1.  
- $$a(0) = 1$$  
- For positive interest rates $$a(t)$$ is increasing, and for negative interest it is decreasing.  
- If interest accrues continuously, the function will be continuous. Otheriwse, $$a(t)$$ will contain discontinuities.
{% enddefinition %}

{% definition %}
Amount Function

Denoted as $$a(t)$$, gives the accumulated value at $$t \ge 0$$ for an original investment of $$k$$. It has mostly the same properties, except for $$a(0) = k$$.
{% enddefinition %}

We will let $$I_n$$ be the amount of interest earned in the $$n$$-th period

$$
I_n = A(n) - A(n - 1)\ \text{for}\ n \in \mathbb{N}
$$

### Proportionality

Sps. an investment of $$b$$ is made and this investment will follow another investment strategy with $$A(t), t\gt0$$. Assume no other deposits or withdrawals for this investment.

- If the investment of $$b$$ is made at time 0, then the value of the investment at time $$t$$ is given by $$b\frac{A(t)}{A(0)}$$
- If the invetment of $$b$$ is made at time s, then the value of the investment at time $$t$$ is given by $$b\frac{A(t)}{A(s)}$$

{% example %}
1

An investment of $10 000 is made into a fund at time $$t = 0$$. The fund develops the following balances over the next 4 years.

| $$t$$ | $$A(t)$$ | $$I_n$$ |
| --- | ------ | ----- |
| 0   | 10 000 |       |
| 1   | 10 600 | $$I_1$$ = 600 |
| 2   | 11 024 | $$I_2$$ = 424 |
| 3   | 11 576,2 | $$I_3$$ = 551,2 |
| 4   | 12 732,72 | $$I_4$$ = 1 157,52 |

If $5 000 is invested at $$t = 1$$ under the same interest environment, find the accumulated value of the $5 000 at $$t = 3$$.

$$
x = \frac{5000A(3)}{A(1)} = \frac{5000(11575.2)}{10600} = 5460
$$

{% endexample %}

{% example %}
2

It is known that $$a(t)$$ is of the form $$a(t) = b^{0.1t}+c$$. If $300 invested at time 0 accumulates to $309.73 at time 5, find the accumulated value at time 12 of $250 invested at time 3.

$$
\begin{align}
a(0) &= 1 = be^0 + c\\
c &= 1 - b
\end{align}
$$

$$
\begin{align}
A(0) &= 300 = 300a(0)\\
A(t) &= 300A(t)\\
309.73 &= 300(be^{.5} + 1 - b)\\
\frac{309.73}{300}&=be^{.5}+1-b\\
b&=\frac{\frac{309.73}{300} - 1}{e^{.5} - 1} \approx 0.05\\
c&\approx .95
\end{align}
$$

Finally, we solve

$$
\frac{250A(12)}{A(3)} = 250 \cdot \frac{300(.05e^{.1(12)} + .95)}{300(.05e^{.1(3)} + .95)}
$$

Which yields $274.20 at time 12.
{% endexample %}

## ยง 1.3: The Effective Rate of Interest
{% definition %}
Effective Rate of Interest

$$i$$ is the amount of money that one unit invested at the beginning of a period will earn during the period, where interest is paid at the end of the period. This assumes the principal remains constant throughout the period.

The amount can be calculated as $$i_n = \frac{I_n}{A(n-1)}$$.

It is the ratio of the amount of interest earned in the $$n^{\text{th}}$$ period to the amount of principal invested at the beginning of the period.

**Note:** The eff. rate is often expressed as a percentage.
{% enddefinition %}

{% example %}
3

An investment of $10 000 is made into a fund at time $$t = 0$$. The fund develops the following balances over the next 3 years.

| $$t$$ | $$A(t)$$ | $$I_n$$ |
| --- | ------ | ----- |
| 0   | 10 000 |       |
| 1   | 10 600 | $$I_1$$ = 600 |
| 2   | 11 024 | $$I_2$$ = 424 |
| 3   | 11 576,2 | $$I_3$$ = 551,2 |

Find the effective rate of interest.
$$i_1 = \frac{I_1}{A(1)} = 6\%$$
$$i_2 = \frac{I_2}{A(2)} = 4\%$$
$$i_3 = \frac{I_3}{A(3)} = 5\%$$

{% endexample %}
