---
layout: note
title:  "Ch. 1 ยง4-5 Simple and Compound Interest"
date:   2021-01-21 11:30:00
categories: math 325
semester: spring21
---

## ยง 1.4: Simple Interest

{% definition %}
Simple Interest

Simple interest is when the interest accrued each period is constant. This, the acc. func. is $$a(t) = 1 + it$$

**Note**: Unless tated otherwise, under simple interest, it will be assumed that interest is accried proportionally over fraction periods.
{% enddefinition %}

{% example %}
ยง 1.4, 1

A bank pays a simple interest rate of 2.5% per annum. $2 000 is deposited on 1 Jan. 2004.

a) Compute the accumulated value on 1 Apr. 2006.

There are 2 years and 3 months between 1 Jan. 04 and 1 Apr. 06.

$$
2000(1 + 0.025(2.25))
$$

which means the accumulated value at the end is **$2112.50**

b) How long until the accumulated amount is $2 230?

$$
\begin{align}
2230 &= 2000(1 + 0.025t)\\
\frac{2230}{2000} &= 1 + 0.025t\\
\frac{2230}{2000} - 1 &= 0.025t\\
t &= \frac{1}{0.025}\left(\frac{2230}{2000} - 1\right)
\end{align}
$$

which ends up being **4.6 years**.
{% endexample %}

TODO: Transcribe other example from lecture notes

## ยง 1.5: Compound Interest
{% definition %}
Compound Interest

Compound interest is when the interest is automatically reinvested to earn additional interest.

The accumulation function where $$t \in \mathbb{N}$$ is $$a(t) = (1 + i)^t$$, where $$i$$ is the compound interest rate for the period.

**Note**: A constant rate of compound interest implies a constant eff. rate.
{% enddefinition %}

$$
i_n = \frac{a(n) - a(n - 1)}{a(n - 1)} = \frac{(1 + i)^n - (1 + i)^{n - 1}}{(1 + i)^{n - 1}} = \frac{(1 + i)^{n - 1}(1 + i - 1)}{(1 + i)^{n - 1}} = i
$$

**Note**: Unless otherwise stated, assume that interest is accrued over fractional periods for compound interest according to the formula.

TODO: Transcribe other examples from lecture notes
