---
layout: note
title:  "Ch. 1 ยง6-7 Present Value, and Eff. Rate of Discount"
date:   2021-01-26 11:30:00
categories: math 325
semester: spring21
---
## ยง 1.6: Present Value
The **accumulation factor**, or $$1 + i$$, accumulates the value of an investment at the beginning of a period to its value at the end of that period.

How much should be invested initially such that the balance will be 1 at the end?

$$
\begin{align}
    1 &= x (1 + i)\\
    x &= \frac{1}{1+i}\\
    &= (1 + i)^{-1}
\end{align}
$$


{% definition %}
Discount Factor

The term $$v = (1+i)^{-1}$$ is called the **discount factor**, because it "discounts" the value of an investment at the end of a period, to its value at the beginning.
{% enddefinition %}

The amount that should be invested initially in order to accumulate an amount of 1 at the end of $$t$$ periods is $$\frac{1}{1 + it} = v^t$$.

{% example %}
1.6.1

A payment of $1 000 is to be made at time 7 years. The annual eff. rate is 6%.

(a) Determine the present value of this payment at times 0 and 4.

**Note**: $$PV_n$$ represents the present value $$n$$ periods earlier.

$$PV_7 = 1000v^7 = 100(1.06)^{-7} \approx $665.06$$

$$PV_3 = 1000v^3 = 100(1.06)^{-3} \approx $839.62$$

Notice that $$PV_3 = v^{-4}PV_7$$.

(b) How many years will it take for the account to reach $800, if the present value at time 0 is invested.

$$
\begin{align}
665.06(1.06)^t &= 800\\
t&=\log_{1.06}\left(\frac{800}{665.06}\right)\\
&= 3.17\ \text{years}
\end{align}
$$
{% endexample %}

{% example %}
1.6.2

An investment of $1 000 will grow to $6 000 after 20 years. Find the sum of the PV of two payments at $5 000 each, which occur at the end of 15 and 30 years, assume the same interest rate.
{% endexample %}

{% example %}
1.6.3

Option 1: A payment of $950 now and another payment of $1 000 at time 2.
Option 2: One payment of $2 000 at time 1.

What annual eff. interest rate would make both options equivalent?
{% endexample %}

## ยง 1.7: Effective Rate of Discount
- If Sue borrows $100 from the bank for 1 year at an eff. rate of interest of 5%, then at the end of one period, Sue would pay bay the initial loan of $100 plus $5 in interest.
- If Bob borrows $100 for one year at an eff. rate of discount of 5%, then the bank collects its interest of 5% in advance, and gives Bob $95. At the end of the period, Bob will pay $100.

The **effective rate of interest**, $$i$$, is a measure of the interest paid at the end of the period.

$$
i_n = \frac{A(n) - A(n - 1)}{A(n - 1)} = \frac{I_n}{A(n - 1)}
$$

The **effective rate of discount**, $$d$$, is a measure of interest paid at the beginning of the period.

$$
d_n = \frac{A(n) - A(n - 1)}{A(n)} = \frac{I_n}{A(n)}
$$

**Note**: The eff. rate of discount is constant for each period when compounding.

For an annual compound rate of discount, $$d$$:
- The present value of a payment of $1 to be made in $$t$$ years is $$(1-d)^t$$
- The accumulated value after $$t$$ years of a deposit of $1 is $$(1 - d)^{-t}$$

{% example %}
1.7.1

How much should an investor deposit today in order to have $4 000 in 5 years if the annual rate of discount is 6%?

$$
\text{PV} = 4000(1-.06)^5 = 2935.62
$$
{% endexample %}

{% example %}
1.7.2

Compare the accumulated amount of $1 000 invested for 10 years at an annual rate of interest of 6% versus an annual rate of discount of 6%.

- Interest: $$1000(1 + .06)^{10} = 1790.85$$
- Discount: $$1000(1 - .06)^{-10} = 1856.61$$

For the same percentage of interest and discount, the rate of discount will yield more money.
{% endexample %}
