---
layout: post
title:  "Content Security Policy with MathJax"
date:   2021-02-01 13:09:56
modified_date: 2021-06-10 21:40:00
categories: web
math: true
excerpt: MathJax creates a lot of inline styles, and that does not bode well with the Content Security Policy header.
---

{% archive %}
&nbsp;

Most of the article is now ***irrelevant*** due to the switch over to $$\KaTeX$$.
{% endarchive %}

The **Content-Security-Policy** (CSP) HTTP header tells the browser which sources it can trust to load content from.

If the CSP header is defined, and the page requests content (styles, fonts, scripts, etc.) that is not explicitly allowed by the directive, the browser will not load it.

For example, this page has the following CSP header:
```
default-src 'self' https://static.barnden.dev;
style-src 'self' https://static.barnden.dev
  'sha256-q14HoGkMTEOPy6Ed7RC2Ok59tI4TpQBNcW9P/d04xfc='
  'sha256-NQvjRWpzq0LudnU0Uwu4adQNpuwJReG0H3GUGMseSnY=';
```

The `default-src` lists the default allowed sources that the web page can load content from. In this case, the web page will be able to load content from `'self'` which is `https://barnden.dev`, or `https://static.barnden.dev`.

And the `style-src` contains the allowed sources for CSS sources. At the end, the `style-src` has two `sha256` hashes, in addition to the `'self'` and `https://static.barnden.dev`. Because `style-src` has different rules, it will not automatically inherit from `style-src`, so that's the reason for the redundant `'self'` and static domain.

From these rules, inline CSS will not be rendered by the browser, as that falls under the `unsafe-inline` source. As noted by the name, allowing *any* inline CSS ***is*** unsafe. One work around is using the hashes, by precomputing the hashes of the inline styles, we can whitelist certain inline CSS styles. This is required when using MathJax, as it relies on inline styles to render the math.

## Actually using CSP
My goal is simple: using nginx without modules or plugins, host a static site with as few CSP directives as possible.

The static part is easy, the site uses [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) to compile markdown into static HTML pages that can then be served on the nginx server. For styling, I created a custom Jekyll theme that allows me to easily style pages without using inline styles.

At first, fonts were an issue, as I relied on [Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/) to provide the web fonts for me. Now, fonts on the site are hosted through `static.barnden.dev` instead, which allows me to let the `font-src` to fallback onto the default direcive.

Then, using MathJax on the client side was another issue, as I had to add 3<sup>rd</sup> party CSS/JS to make it work, which meant more complicated `script-src` and `style-src` directives. 

### Supporting MathJax
To configure MathJax on the client side, I followed the documentation and used an inline script before the MathJax script from the CDN. This meant either using `unsafe-inline` that defeats the purpose of using CSP, or using hashes. I got around this by moving the configuration over to its own file, which was allowed under the `self` directive. But, I was still bothered loading the MathJax source from a CDN, which required another host exemption in `script-src`. And MathJax generated a *ton* of inline styling, and each one of those would require an exemption.

As the styles were generated client side, I thought of a few options for using CSP:
  1. Allow `unsafe-inline` for `style-src`.
  2. Loosen the CSP directive in the HTTP header. Then compute CSP hashes on client side, and harden the CSP by using a `meta` tag.
  3. Pre-render the styles on the server side, compute CSP hashes and put into the header.

Option 1 obviously defeats the purpose of using CSP; and option 2 will not work, browsers should not and will not apply CSP rules after load.

So option 3 wins. After searching for server-side $$\LaTeX$$, I found: [jekyll-mathjax-csp](https://github.com/fmeum/jekyll-mathjax-csp). As hinted by the name of the plugin, it also generates hashes to include in the CSP to ensure the math renders properly.

There is one problem: there is far too many hashes. Each page that contained math had three `sha256` hashes! And, the plugin expected me to put all of the hashes into one CSP header. This would make the CSP header absurdly long, as nginx would just send all the hashes, even ones not relevant to the page.

So, I [forked jekyll-mathjax-csp](https://github.com/barnden/jekyll-mathjax-csp) added a feature that generates a `csp.conf` file that could be imported into the `barnden.dev` nginx server config.

```nginx
location /2021/01/noise-functions {
    add_header Content-Security-Policy
        "default-src 'self' https://static.barnden.dev;
         style-src 'self' https://static.barnden.dev
            'sha256-zH6jtiFvbKu2rFJCHatF+N2xg6ZGirQdRrDpSagk12c=';
         font-src 'self' https://static.barnden.dev;
         worker-src 'self' https://static.barnden.dev;"
        always;
}
```
<figcaption class="center" markdown="1">
A location block from the resulting `csp.conf` file. Syntax invalid due to stylistic formatting.
</figcaption>

The `csp.conf` file would allow me to selectively apply CSP options to certain resources. In the above example, when a user navigates to `/2021/01/noise-functions`, a CSP header containing only the hashes used on the page will be sent.

This presents a new problem: I cannot use a default CSP header. The current method generates a new header, and passes it along with all the previous headers. By adding a default CSP header, there will be two CSP headers heading towards the browser. When the browser receives both, it will naturally use the more restrictive of the two. This means the hashes will be discarded, and no $$\LaTeX$$. As my goal is no plugins or modules, I *cannot* modify the default CSP header and append the hashes.

I looked into a few possible solutions to this problem:
- Just use *all* the hashes, and waste a *ton* of bandwidth through HTTP headers.
  - This is just *not* a good idea.
- Generate location directive(s) for all the pages that don't have MathJax.
  - Just inefficient, instead of processing a small subset of pages, I now need to process **every. single. page.**
  - Configuration bloat, in addition to more processing time, we take up a lot more storage.
- Install a module/plugin that prevents header duplication or allows header modification
  - These modules are not present in the distro's package manager, and I do not intend on compiling it myself as that requires more maintenance.
- Roll my own server/web app to serve behind nginx
  - Again, I just want to use plain nginx, nothing special. But, this would be interesting to attempt in the future, as I can try to render on demand, or generate nonces instead of hashing.
- Host on Github Pages
  - I want to have as much control over my site as possible, and use plugins that aren't included with gh-pages.
- If..else inside location context
  - See [if is evil](https://www.nginx.com/resources/wiki/start/topics/depth/ifisevil/) for why *not* to use `if`.
- Using the `map` directive in the nginx config allows me to create if-like logic based on `$uri` for the CSP header.
  - Unfortunately, the `map` directive is not allowed inside a `server` block, which was where I was initially planning to import the `csp.conf`.

Out of the possible solutions, the last is one of the simplest and happens to solve every issue. The `map` directive maps an input value to an output, and stores it inside a variable. In this case, I can store the CSP directives inside `$csp`, and map the `$uri` to those directives. And for cases that do not have a specific mapping, I can use a `default` map.


So, I rewrote the section of the plugin that generated the `csp.conf` to generate the mapping:

```nginx
map $uri $csp {
    default "default csp header";
    "/2021/01/noise-functions" "CSP header with hash for MathJax style";
    # and so on...
}
```

As stated previously, I couldn't use this mapping inside a `server` block, but it worked inside an `http` block, so I imported the generated `csp.conf` in there instead. I added the following line in the `barnden.dev` config to send out the CSP header:
```nginx
add_header Content-Security-Policy $csp always;
```

### Compatibility with jekyll-minify
I opened my browser and loaded `barnden.dev`, and there was no $$\LaTeX$$! It took me a while to realize what was going on: I was using [jekyll-minifier](https://github.com/digitalsparky/jekyll-minifier) to minify the sources, and as a result, the inline styles would have different formatting leading to different hashes.

To combat this, I modified my fork of jekyll-mathjax-csp to automatically minify the inline styles generated by MathJax, regardless of the value of `JEKYLL_ENV` (jekyll-minifier only minifies if this is set to `production`). The CSS is minified using [cssminify2](https://rubygems.org/gems/cssminify2), the same as jekyll-minifier, so the hashes should be the same.

### Why not $$\KaTeX$$?
Before attempting to get MathJax to play nice with CSP, and CSP with nginx, I attempted to switch over to $$\KaTeX$$. Initially, I found [jekyll-katex](https://github.com/linjer/jekyll-katex) and implemented it. It seemed to check all of my boxes:

- [x] server side rendering
- [x] easy to create csp directives
- [x] faster rendering when compared to MathJax

$$\KaTeX$$ does have some tradeoffs, as at the time of writing it only offers a subset of the $$\LaTeX$$ support from MathJax. However, this is acceptable to me, as I typically write simple formulas and that $$\KaTeX$$ greatly out performs jekyll-mathjax-csp.

Unfortunately, the web fonts (over CDN and self hosted) did not seem to load properly. And, when comparing against the exemplars on [katex website](https://katex.org/), the rendered $$\LaTeX$$ using jekyll-katex did not meet my expectations. More over, using liquid tags to denote blocks of math is an anti-pattern; being able to surround blocks of math using patterns like `\( math \)` or `$ math $` is much more ergonomic.
